doc/md: deployment guide to k8s with init containers (#1277)
ariga/atlas: doc/md/guides/deploying/init.md

---
id: k8s-init-containers
slug: /guides/deploying/k8s-init-container
title: Deploying schema migrations to Kubernetes with Init Containers
---

In [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io), [Init Containers](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/init-containers/)
are specialized containers that run before app containers in a Pod. Init containers
can contain utilities or setup scripts not present in an app image. 

Init containers can be utilized to run schema migrations with Atlas before the

> application loads. Because init containers can use a container image different

Reviewer: "before the application process starts".

> from the application, developers can use a [purpose-built image](image.md) that

Reviewer: image.md?

only contains Atlas and the migrations scripts to run them.  This way, less 
can be included in the application runtime environment, which reduces
the attack surface from a security perspective. 

Depending on an application's [deployment strategy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/#strategy),
multiple replicas of an init container may run concurrently.  In the case of
schema migrations, this can cause a dangerous race condition with unknown outcomes.
To prevent this, in databases that support advisory locking, Atlas will acquire

> a lock on the migration operation before running migrations which makes the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a lock on the migration operation before running migrations, making the
```

> To prevent this, in databases that support advisory locking, Atlas will acquire
> a lock on the migration operation before running migrations, making the
> operation mutually exclusive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To prevent this, in databases that support advisory locking, Atlas will acquire
a database lock before running migrations, making the operation mutually exclusive.
```

In this guide, we demonstrate how schema migrations can be integrated into
a Kubernetes deployment using an init container.

Prerequisites to the guide:
1. [A migrations docker image](/guides/deploying/image)
2. [A Kubernetes Deployment manifest](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/) defining
   your application.
3. A running Kubernetes cluster to work against.

## Adding an init container

Suppose our deployment manifest looks similar to this:

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: nginx-deployment
  labels:
    app: nginx
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: nginx
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: nginx
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: nginx
        image: nginx:1.14.2
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80
```

Now, let's say our [migration container image](image.md) which contains the Atlas binary

> and our migration scripts is available at `ghcr.io/repo/migrations:v0.1.2`. We would like

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and our migration scripts are available at `ghcr.io/repo/migrations:v0.1.2`. We would like
```

Author: the migrations _are_, but the container _is_

> to run `migrate apply` against our target database residing at `mysql://root:s3cr37p455@dbhostname.io:3306/db`. 

Reviewer: Add an example `dockerfile` block?

We will use a Kubernetes [Secret](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/) to
store a [config file](/atlas-schema/projects) containing the credentials to our database. Create the file:

```hcl title=atlas.hcl
env "k8s" {
  url = "mysql://root:s3cr37p455@dbhostname.io:3306/db"
}
```

Kubernetes accepts secrets encoded as base64 strings. Let's calculate the
base64 string representing our project file:

```text
cat atlas.hcl | base64
```
Copy the result:
```text
ZW52ICJrOHMiIHsKICB1cmwgPSAibXlzcWw6Ly9yb290OnMzY3IzN3A0NTVAZGJob3N0bmFtZS5pbzozMzA2L2RiIgp9Cg==
```

Create the secret manifest:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: atlas-project
type: Opaque
data:
  atlas.hcl: ZW52ICJrOHMiIHsKICB1cmwgPSAibXlzcWw6Ly9yb290OnMzY3IzN3A0NTVAZGJob3N0bmFtZS5pbzozMzA2L2RiIgp9Cg==
```

Apply the secret on the cluster:

```yaml
kubectl apply -f secret.yaml
```

The secret is created:
```text
secret/atlas-project created
```

> Next, add a volume to mount the config file and an init container using it to

Reviewer 2: using it to the deployment? Maybe, using it for the deployment?

Author: it should be to the deployment manifest

> the deployment: 

Author: ```suggestion
the deployment manifest: 
```
